docs/ThreadSanitizer.rst, before:

ThreadSanitizer
===============

Introduction
------------

ThreadSanitizer is a tool that detects data races.  It consists of a compiler
instrumentation module and a run-time library.  Typical slowdown introduced by
ThreadSanitizer is about **5x-15x**.  Typical memory overhead introduced by
ThreadSanitizer is about **5x-10x**.

How to build
------------

Follow the `Clang build instructions <../get_started.html>`_.  CMake build is
supported.

Supported Platforms
-------------------

ThreadSanitizer is supported on Linux x86_64 (tested on Ubuntu 10.04 and 12.04).
Support for MacOS 10.7 (64-bit only) is planned for 2013.  Support for 32-bit
platforms is problematic and not yet planned.

Usage
-----

Simply compile your program with ``-fsanitize=thread -fPIE`` and link it with
``-fsanitize=thread -pie``.  To get a reasonable performance add ``-O1`` or
higher.  Use ``-g`` to get file names and line numbers in the warning messages.

Example:

.. code-block:: c++

  % cat projects/compiler-rt/lib/tsan/lit_tests/tiny_race.c
  #include <pthread.h>
  int Global;
  void *Thread1(void *x) {
    Global = 42;
    return x;
  }
  int main() {
    pthread_t t;
    pthread_create(&t, NULL, Thread1, NULL);
    Global = 43;
    pthread_join(t, NULL);
    return Global;
  }

  $ clang -fsanitize=thread -g -O1 tiny_race.c -fPIE -pie

If a bug is detected, the program will print an error message to stderr.
Currently, ThreadSanitizer symbolizes its output using an external
``addr2line`` process (this will be fixed in future).

.. code-block:: bash

  % ./a.out
  WARNING: ThreadSanitizer: data race (pid=19219)
    Write of size 4 at 0x7fcf47b21bc0 by thread T1:
      #0 Thread1 tiny_race.c:4 (exe+0x00000000a360)

    Previous write of size 4 at 0x7fcf47b21bc0 by main thread:
      #0 main tiny_race.c:10 (exe+0x00000000a3b4)

    Thread T1 (running) created at:
      #0 pthread_create tsan_interceptors.cc:705 (exe+0x00000000c790)
      #1 main tiny_race.c:9 (exe+0x00000000a3a4)

Limitations
-----------

* ThreadSanitizer uses more real memory than a native run. At the default
  settings the memory overhead is 5x plus 1Mb per each thread. Settings with 3x
  (less accurate analysis) and 9x (more accurate analysis) overhead are also
  available.
* ThreadSanitizer maps (but does not reserve) a lot of virtual address space.
  This means that tools like ``ulimit`` may not work as usually expected.
* Libc/libstdc++ static linking is not supported.
* ThreadSanitizer requires ``-fPIE -pie`` compiler flags.

Current Status
--------------

ThreadSanitizer is in beta stage.  It is known to work on large C++ programs
using pthreads, but we do not promise anything (yet).  C++11 threading is
supported with llvm libstdc++.  The test suite is integrated into CMake build
and can be run with ``make check-tsan`` command.

We are actively working on enhancing the tool --- stay tuned.  Any help,
especially in the form of minimized standalone tests is more than welcome.

More Information
----------------
`http://code.google.com/p/thread-sanitizer <http://code.google.com/p/thread-sanitizer/>`_.

Commit message:

tsan: add __has_feature(thread_sanitizer)
git-svn-id: https://llvm.org/svn/llvm-project/cfe/trunk@170314 91177308-0d34-0410-b5e6-96231b3b80d8

docs/ThreadSanitizer.rst, after:

ThreadSanitizer
===============

Introduction
------------

ThreadSanitizer is a tool that detects data races.  It consists of a compiler
instrumentation module and a run-time library.  Typical slowdown introduced by
ThreadSanitizer is about **5x-15x**.  Typical memory overhead introduced by
ThreadSanitizer is about **5x-10x**.

How to build
------------

Follow the `Clang build instructions <../get_started.html>`_.  CMake build is
supported.

Supported Platforms
-------------------

ThreadSanitizer is supported on Linux x86_64 (tested on Ubuntu 10.04 and 12.04).
Support for MacOS 10.7 (64-bit only) is planned for 2013.  Support for 32-bit
platforms is problematic and not yet planned.

Usage
-----

Simply compile your program with ``-fsanitize=thread -fPIE`` and link it with
``-fsanitize=thread -pie``.  To get a reasonable performance add ``-O1`` or
higher.  Use ``-g`` to get file names and line numbers in the warning messages.

Example:

.. code-block:: c++

  % cat projects/compiler-rt/lib/tsan/lit_tests/tiny_race.c
  #include <pthread.h>
  int Global;
  void *Thread1(void *x) {
    Global = 42;
    return x;
  }
  int main() {
    pthread_t t;
    pthread_create(&t, NULL, Thread1, NULL);
    Global = 43;
    pthread_join(t, NULL);
    return Global;
  }

  $ clang -fsanitize=thread -g -O1 tiny_race.c -fPIE -pie

If a bug is detected, the program will print an error message to stderr.
Currently, ThreadSanitizer symbolizes its output using an external
``addr2line`` process (this will be fixed in future).

.. code-block:: bash

  % ./a.out
  WARNING: ThreadSanitizer: data race (pid=19219)
    Write of size 4 at 0x7fcf47b21bc0 by thread T1:
      #0 Thread1 tiny_race.c:4 (exe+0x00000000a360)

    Previous write of size 4 at 0x7fcf47b21bc0 by main thread:
      #0 main tiny_race.c:10 (exe+0x00000000a3b4)

    Thread T1 (running) created at:
      #0 pthread_create tsan_interceptors.cc:705 (exe+0x00000000c790)
      #1 main tiny_race.c:9 (exe+0x00000000a3a4)

``__has_feature(thread_sanitizer)``
------------------------------------

In some cases one may need to execute different code depending on whether
ThreadSanitizer is enabled.
:ref:`\_\_has\_feature <langext-__has_feature-__has_extension>` can be used for
this purpose.

.. code-block:: c

    #if defined(__has_feature) && __has_feature(thread_sanitizer)
    // code that builds only under ThreadSanitizer
    #endif

Limitations
-----------

* ThreadSanitizer uses more real memory than a native run. At the default
  settings the memory overhead is 5x plus 1Mb per each thread. Settings with 3x
  (less accurate analysis) and 9x (more accurate analysis) overhead are also
  available.
* ThreadSanitizer maps (but does not reserve) a lot of virtual address space.
  This means that tools like ``ulimit`` may not work as usually expected.
* Libc/libstdc++ static linking is not supported.
* ThreadSanitizer requires ``-fPIE -pie`` compiler flags.

Current Status
--------------

ThreadSanitizer is in beta stage.  It is known to work on large C++ programs
using pthreads, but we do not promise anything (yet).  C++11 threading is
supported with llvm libstdc++.  The test suite is integrated into CMake build
and can be run with ``make check-tsan`` command.

We are actively working on enhancing the tool --- stay tuned.  Any help,
especially in the form of minimized standalone tests is more than welcome.

More Information
----------------
`http://code.google.com/p/thread-sanitizer <http://code.google.com/p/thread-sanitizer/>`_.
